# Lights Out: India’s Power Struggles Amid Rising Weather Extremes

## Authors:
Yiyi He, Georgia Tech<br>
Jun Rentschler, The World Bank<br>

## Research gap
Power grid is typically designed to provide a stable and continuous energy supply over long periods, as frequent disruptions—such as blackouts or brownouts—can have costly and far-reaching consequences. However, this stability is premised on design assumptions based on historically stable operating conditions.What has been studied extensively is the impact of *extreme weather events* on the power grid . However, not all power outages can be attributed to these extreme events. Daily and seasonal variations in weather conditions also contribute significantly to grid disruptions. While *acute* shocks to infrastructure systems—often intensified by a changing climate—have been the focus of much of the existing literature, the *chronic* and cumulative effects of gradual weather changes remain insufficiently examined.


## Datasets used in this work
### Voltage timeseries: [Electricity Supply Monitoring Initiative](https://watchyourpower.org/the_initiative.php) (ESMI)

We collect and analyze this minute-level voltage data from ESMI to assess patterns in electricity supply. Electricity Supply Monitoring Initiative (ESMI) was launched in March 2015 by Prayas Energy Group. It provides evidence-based feedback on the quality of electricity supply to end users across India. As part of this initiative, more than 500 Electricity Supply Monitors (ESMs), which has been deployed across the country to record minute-by-minute voltage readings, creating a reliable and granular database of supply interruptions at hundreds of consumer locations. The ESMI voltage records span a total of almost 11 years from October 2014 to April 2025 recording over **7 million** location hours of voltage data in total.

*ESM is a plug-in device that integrates a voltage recorder. It provides voltage records by the minute at its location and sends data to a central server using Ground Penetrating Radar System (GPRS)

### Weather timeseries: [ERA5-Land](https://cds.climate.copernicus.eu/cdsapp#!/dataset/reanalysis-era5-land?tab=overview)

We download hourly weather timeseries from the [ERA5-Land data](https://cds.climate.copernicus.eu/datasets/reanalysis-era5-land?tab=overview) available at the Climate Data Store. It combines model data with observations from across the world into a globally complete and consistent dataset. The spatial resolution is 0.1° × 0.1°, which corresponds to approximately 9 km × 9 km at the equator. We choose three variables to investigate in this study:
1. **Temperature**: Temperature of air measured in Kelvin at two meters above the surface of land, sea, or in-land waters.
2. **Wind speed**: Including the horizontal (eastward component) as well as the vertical (northward component) speed of air moving towards the east measured in meters per second, at a height of ten metres above the surface of the Earth. In this study, we combined the horizontal (eastward component) as well as the vertical (northward component) of wind speed to calculate the magnituded of the total wind vector.
3. **Precipitation**: Accumulated liquid and frozen water, including rain and snow measured in meters that falls to the Earth's surface. It is the sum of large-scale precipitation (that precipitation which is generated by large-scale weather patterns, such as troughs and cold fronts) and convective precipitation (generated by convection which occurs when air at lower levels in the atmosphere is warmer and less dense than the air above, so it rises).

### Project Dataset Repository - OneDrive Access

- Station-wise Augmented Dickey-Fuller test results for hourly dataset [[link to data]](https://gtvault-my.sharepoint.com/:x:/g/personal/yhe603_gatech_edu/Eb5YSG7oP4lHr_pNp1eloksBttu31KyaOHkir8b8m2ksKg?e=yGChQz)
- Station-wise Augmented Dickey-Fuller test results for daily dataset [[link to data]](https://gtvault-my.sharepoint.com/:x:/g/personal/yhe603_gatech_edu/EepiX2khbCtFiN4b5jj7v-oBHpMYnVqiPXzVhW-mVl7i5A?e=pmLMoO)
- Station-wise Granger Causality test results (hourly)
    - Maxlag=3 [[link to data]](https://gtvault-my.sharepoint.com/:x:/g/personal/yhe603_gatech_edu/Ebb56fOnazxFkHDcbmPvTUgBVgyQa1Tv3QqHXfn9j1HCLg?e=vGD2G1)
    - Maxlag=24 [[link to data]](https://gtvault-my.sharepoint.com/:x:/g/personal/yhe603_gatech_edu/ETgtvvCPk71Hsto2fzcK8woBTS40-dGLHcrhVtiKThtL0A?e=iHhj9z)
    - Maxlag=72 [[link to data]](https://gtvault-my.sharepoint.com/:x:/g/personal/yhe603_gatech_edu/EVnKlof26eVMqEoKPrVi_-kBI5XJ4aEQfFhZcsGXaYr_ww?e=UoWoYI)
    - Maxlag=120 [[link to data]](https://gtvault-my.sharepoint.com/:x:/g/personal/yhe603_gatech_edu/EQ-f9SccLANHuGEhEfxozbsBfBGDuAkDqEwHTCaydxd4Bg?e=bGIqVN)


**File organization**

Data preparation: 
01_

Previous:
- india_esmi_scraper.py: scrapes the ESMI website to get available data for currently online stations, resuming where the last scraping session had left off.  
Ignores data before January 1st, 2015, because that was when Prayas officially launched the ESMI program, and the available data quality before that is flawed.  
Outputs csv files in the format [id]+[location]+[district]+[state].csv  
The minute by minute datetimes are recorded in the default pandas export format yyyy-MM-dd HH:mm:ss.
- indonesia_date_conversion.py: converts dates in the indonesia dataset to the uniform date format used throughout this project- india_pkl2csv.py: [Deprecated] converted previous pkl output of the india scraper to the final csv format.